Debating the Doctrine
=====================

Religious faith has to be one of the
most significant world views we
inherit - it is remarkably resilient in
the face of doubt and remains
virtually unchanged throughout their
lives for a majority of the people. The
latter can be partially attributed to
the fact that we prefer to dance
around the subject and have little to
no meaningful conversation about it.
But it is not surprising that we do so,
considering that historically, the
price of differing on matters of
religious faith has often been
bloodshed.
But religion remains prevalent, and
either subliminally or overtly, our
lives continue to get affected by it.
Any course corrections can happen
only through discussion. And so we
need to bring the subject back to the
table, and this time enforce higher
standards.

Proper philosophical exchanges
and debates on the subjects of God
and religion are certainly an acquired
taste. The subject matter might come
across as very heavy, controversial,
or even useless to the uninitiated.
However, those who do take the
plunge would come to realize just
how intellectually stimulating and
replete with witty sallies these
conversations can get. Personally, the
highlight of my entire experience of
watching debates on these subjects
was how some eloquent and erudite
apologists would often put on the
backfoot even the most seasoned
atheist debaters, whom I had
internally been rooting for.

The rational route to adopting a
religious faith involves certain
implicit premises that you have to
agree to. As far as theistic religions
go, a belief in a Creator is the first
step on that route.

Suppose we are provided with
multiple explanations for a
phenomenon. We will probably
invoke Occam’s Razor and go with
the one that seems the least
contrived. If the phenomenon in
question is the existence of living
beings in the universe, then the
choices we are faced with are rather
simple. We could either go down the
route that theistic religions take and
concede that the universe had an
intelligent designer. Or we could
choose to believe a more naturalistic
explanation and say that it is only the
laws of nature that got us here.

There is general consensus in the
scientific community that the
existence of all carbon based life
forms, as we know them, is
predicated on the fundamental
constants of the universe taking on
particular values. But here is the
catch: there is virtually no wiggle
room for these constants to take on
some different values and still have
us around. To put this into
perspective with an example, if the
strong nuclear force had differed
from its currently established value
by as little as 0.5%, none of what we
see around would have existed in the
same form. 

We can think of this as a Bayesian
problem. The evidence is that we
exist. In light of this evidence, we are
to determine the more probable of the
two competing hypotheses. Assume
that we start with ambivalence and
assign equal prior probabilities to the
veracity of both hypotheses. The
likelihood of the universe reaching a
state where we exist, is arguably
much lower if the constants were
allowed to take on random values,
than if there were an intelligent
designer with intent. This seems to
lead to a fascinating conclusion: it is
more likely than not that the universe
had a Creator.

There are people who have
nitpicked the above reasoning and
suggested possible ways out, asking
‘which is the set that the constants
are constrained to take on values
from’ and ‘whether they can truly be
random’. There is also a case to be
made that at no point in our lived
experiences have we encountered an
entity remotely as powerful as being
capable of fashioning a mountain,
much less a universe. So, does
starting with equal priors even make
sense? Ultimately, this goes to show
that the debate on the subject is more
nuanced than it would appear at first
glance.

Even from the assumption that the
universe had a Creator, there does
not immediately follow a need to
repose faith in any of the existing
religious doctrines. For a rational
person to abide by a particular
religious doctrine, he first needs to be
convinced beyond doubt that the
sacred texts come straight from the
horse’s mouth. But with
contradictory sections within the
texts and miracles being in short
supply, this is going to be a rather
hard sell.

Verifying the authenticity of the
sacred texts, however, is not the final
step. We further need a good reason
as to why we should obey the
Creator’s will. An analogy I like to
think of is: Parents have almost
complete control over their child’s
well-being. But the child is not
obligated to refrain from exercising
his/her own judgement and
determining whether the parents’
commands bear any merit, because
those commands might well be
pernicious.

Religion seeks to answer the moral
questions for us. And it claims to
speak on behalf of an almighty
Creator. So the question we need to
ask before giving in to the edicts of
religion is, what determines whether
something is morally right? This is an
age-old puzzle many philosophers
have grappled with: Does a thing
become right when God says it is so?
Or does the concept of ‘rightness’
exist independent of this entity we
call God? The former resembles an
argument from authority, a fallacy
that logical reasoning doesn’t take
very kindly to. If at all it is true, then
it becomes necessary to follow the
sacred texts to a tee if they’re found
to be authentic, regardless of how
troubling they might seem to us. And
almost all major religions today have
some prescriptions that are near-
universally abhorred. This is clearly a
dicey way forward.

But is there really a meaningful
alternative to this? In being spaceless
and timeless - this, by definition -
the Creator, if there were one, would
be an obvious ‘absolute’. But can we
find another absolute, an objective
truth, a truly universal common
ground to base our notions of
morality upon? Note that, not finding
any objective standards for moral
correctness is not an option. It would
cede all that we hold sacrosanct, to
individual subjectivism. Imagine the
worst crime you can think of. Imagine
torture. Why do you think it is
reprehensible? If you leave the
instinctive outrage at the door, you
will find it very difficult to justify
your stance when faced with someone
who actually loves torturing people.
You will be really pressed to explain
to the other person why he should
forsake an act from which he derives
pleasure. Without an objective rule
book to play by, aren’t both of you
simply individuals whose brains are
configured to have different
understandings of pleasure and pain,
right and wrong? It would seem there
is nothing that makes your stance
superior to that of the sadist.

While the ramifications might
sound extreme in theory, they aren’t
so in the real world. Societal order
won’t collapse because none of the
options are tenable. The majority can
still agree on the established rules
without fleshing out the entire
reasoning to the last mile, much like
it has been doing all along. But with
humanity having witnessed
calamitous events borne of misguided
thinking, like slavery and the
Holocaust, we would certainly be
keen to promulgate thorough
worked-out logic to steer away from
such horror shows in the future.

While it’s all good to debate faith
and religion in abstract,
epistemological terms, a discussion
on the utility of religion is incomplete
without taking into account human
nature. It is an undeniable fact that a
lot of times, religion forces people to
look beyond themselves and focus on
the bigger picture. It moves people to
partake in charity and social work.
While the motivation might be
anything, the end result is that
society benefits.

However there are also two major
shortcomings that threaten to tip the
balance against religion: Prevalence
of vaguely worded sections that are
open to interpretation, and the
multiplicity of religions.

With religions dealing in absolutes,
it should come as no surprise that the
aforementioned shortcomings have
bred intolerance and hate throughout
history. Religious divides have and
will continue to be exploited
wholesale by individuals to build their
political or financial capital.

A risk-benefit analysis of religious
faith is not slated to reach a
universally acceptable conclusion
anytime soon. However, what the
philosophical conversations can do in
the meantime is push for more people
to learn to reason things out for
themselves, rather than play the
gullible fools. At the heart of
exchanges and debates is a rigorous
yet fun exercise: lay down certain
premises, fortify them with
justifications, crown the premises
with a hopefully unassailable claim,
and watch the opponent lay into your
house of cards.

With the topic being something that
people are emotionally invested in,
the hope is that more people flock to
hear these scintillating
conversations. These exchanges offer
multiple crucial takeaways for the
audience. Even simple learnings such
as ‘thinking in abstract terms’ or the
fact that words have precise
meanings and can’t be used willy-
nilly in place of each other, can go a
long way in raising the standard of
public discourse. This, in turn, will
expedite the process of making
meaningful progress as a society.